---
title: Insert title here
key: 745973c268656dbfc35107d65a735cea

---
## Revenue and cost

```yaml
type: "TitleSlide"
key: "881f0bc964"
```

`@lower_third`

name: Michel Semaan
title: Data Scientist


`@script`
Welcome to the course! My name is Michel, and this is the sample screencast for SQL for Business. In this video, you’ll learn how to calculate revenue and cost.

Before doing that, though, let’s cover the prerequisites of and objectives for the course.


---
## Prerequisites and objectives

```yaml
type: "FullSlide"
key: "5d3b80addf"
```

`@part1`
**Prerequisites**:
- SELECT (WHERE, GROUP BY) 
- JOIN

**Objectives**:
- Learn advanced concepts in SQL (such as CTEs and window functions)
- Use them to answer business-related questions and calculate key metrics


`@script`
You should be comfortable with SELECT statements, how to use the WHERE clause, and how to aggregate using GROUP BY. Going through Intro to SQL for Data Science for the former and Joining Data in PostgreSQL for the latter on DataCamp should put you in a good position.

In this course, you’re going to learn advanced concepts in SQL, such as Common Table Expressions (known as CTEs) and window functions, and use them to answer business-related questions and calculate key metrics.


---
## Retailr

```yaml
type: "FullSlide"
key: "a3b87e2db9"
```

`@part1`
- Online e-commerce company (think Amazon, Etsy)
- Stores all data in a central SQL database
 - User information (registration date, country, et cetera)
 - Items bought by users
 - Inventory
- Wants to extract insights from data to guide business decisions


`@script`
Throughout the course, we’re going to base our queries on the data of a fictional company called Retailr. Retailr is an online e-commerce platform, similar to Amazon or Etsy. It stores all of its data in an SQL database. This data can represent anything from user demographics (such as clients’ registration dates and countries), to the items bought by the users, to the company’s inventory. Retailr wants to leverage its data by extracting insights to guide their business decisions.


---
## Profit

```yaml
type: "FullSlide"
key: "e9616e6a3c"
```

`@part1`
- Is Retailr profitable?
- Profit = Revenue - Cost
 - **Revenue**: The money a company generates (sales, projects, etc)
 - **Cost**: The money a company spends to operate
 - Positive profit means a company is making money
 - Negative profit means a company is losing money


`@script`
The first question one asks about a company is: “Is it profitable?” In other words, if we take all the money that the company pulls in (its revenue), and subtract all the money that the company spends (its cost), is the company left with a positive sum of money?

The formula for profit is profit = revenue - cost. To calculate profit, we’ll first have to get revenue and cost.


---
## Revenue

```yaml
type: "FullSlide"
key: "523616027c"
```

`@part1`
- Retailr generates revenue by selling items online
 - The price of a USB is $10
 - The price of a cable is $4
 - A user buys 2 USBs and 3 cables
 - Retailr generates 10 x 2 + 4 x 3 = 20 + 12 = $32 in revenue


`@script`
Let’s start with revenue.

Since Retailr is an e-commerce platform, its revenue is the money that its users pay to purchase the items on it. For example, if a USB costs $10 and a cable costs $4, and a user buys 2 USBs and 3 cables, Retailr’s revenue from this purchase is $\$10 * 2 + \$4 * 3 = \$20 + \$12 = \$32$. Let’s explore how Retailr stores this data.


---
## Revenue tables

```yaml
type: "TwoColumns"
key: "4dcf161d82"
```

`@part1`
**items**

| item_id | item_name   | item_price |
|---------|-------------|------------|
| 0       | USB         | 10         |
| 1       | Cable       | 4          |
| 2       | SD Card     | 24         |
| 3       | DVD 10-Pack | 15         |
| ...     | ...         | ...        |


`@part2`
**purchases**

| cart_id | client_id | purchase_date | item_id | item_quantity |
|---------|-----------|---------------|---------|---------------|
| 12      | 20        | 2018-10-21    | 0       | 2             |
| 12      | 20        | 2018-10-21    | 1       | 3             |
| 13      | 17        | 2018-10-22    | 3       | 1             |
| ...     | ...       | ...           | ...     | ...           |


`@script`
We’ll focus on two tables. In the items table, we have all the items that the company offers for sale. Item ID is the unique identifier for each item. Item price is for how much we’re selling this item.

The purchases table represents what users have bought on the platform. Let’s go over the columns. Cart ID represents the “cart” that the user has purchased. Client ID tells us who bought this cart. Purchase date tells us when the cart was bought. Item ID references the items table. Finally, item quantity is how many of this item were bought.

In our example above, the USBs and the cables are in the same cart, so they have the same Cart ID.


---
## Calculating revenue

```yaml
type: "FullCodeSlide"
key: "75f23d70f9"
```

`@part1`
```
   SELECT ..., SUM(i.item_price * p.item_quantity)
     FROM items i
     JOIN purchases p ON i.item_id = p.item_id
    WHERE ...
 GROUP BY ...
   HAVING ...
```


`@script`
To calculate revenue, we simply sum item price times item quantity. We’ll have to join purchases to items on Item ID to do that.


---
## Cost

```yaml
type: "TwoRows"
key: "02d4727243"
```

`@part1`
**inventory**

| item_id | order_date | inventory_quantity | total_cost |
|---------|------------|--------------------|------------|
| 0       | 2018-09-01 | 10                 | 5          |
| 1       | 2018-10-03 | 18                 | 3          |
| 2       | 2018-10-04 | 30                 | 12         |
| ...     | ...        | ...                | ...        |


`@part2`
To calculate cost:

```
   SELECT ..., SUM(inv.total_cost)
     FROM inventory inv
    WHERE ...
 GROUP BY ...
   HAVING ...
```


`@script`
Now for cost. We’ll use the same items table, as well as a new table called inventory. Inventory contains all items that Retailr offers for sale, their quantities, and how much it cost Retailr to buy them. If Retailr bought 10 USBs for $5 total, and 10 cables for $3 total, then its cost is $5 + $3 = $8. To calculate cost, we sum the costs of all the items.


---
## Putting it all together

```yaml
type: "FinalSlide"
key: "33e2a93ba2"
```

`@script`
By using aggregates, we can get revenue and cost per cart, per user, or per month.

Let’s apply the above and write the queries to get revenue and cost.

